Windows privileged updates (#1)
marosset/enhancements: keps/sig-windows/1981-windows-privileged-container-support/README.md

-->

### Use case 1: Privileged Daemon Sets
Privileged daemon sets are used to deploy networking (CNI), storage (CSI), device plugins, kube-proxy, and other components to Linux nodes. Currently, similar set-up and deployment operations utilize wins or dedicated proxies (i.e. CSI-proxy, HNS-Proxy) for Windows nodes. With Windows privileged containers, privileged daemon sets will also be available to deploy desired plugins and agents to Windows nodes. For networking scenarios, host network mode will enable these privileged deployments to access and configure host network resources.

### Use case 2: Node plugin containers

> Windows privileged containers would also enable deployment of single privileged containers to Windows nodes. Other functionalities that could be enabled with privileged containers in or out of daemon set deployment include device enumeration, monitoring add-ons, among others.

Reviewer: > single privileged containers to Windows nodes

This is an akward statement. Does this mean a single deployment vs DaemonSet?

Author: I just fixed some markdown linting issues here but yea, that doesn't make sense.
Will update.

-->
- Host network mode support is only targeted for privileged containers and pods.
- Privileged pods can only consist of privileged containers. Standard Windows Server containers or other non-privileged containers will not be supported. This is because containers in a Kubernetes pod share an IP. For the privileged containers with host network mode, this container IP will be the host IP. As a result, a pod cannot consist of a privileged container with the host IP and an unprivileged Windows Server container(s) sharing a vNic on the host with a different IP, or vice versa.

> - We are currently investigating service mesh scenarios where privileged containers in a pod will need host networking access but run alongside non-privileged containers in a pod. This would require further investigation and is out of scope for this KEP.

Reviewer: could we expand this or add to the Non-goals that we are not going to enable these for init containers?

Author: I'll add a non-goal for supporting both privileged and non-privileged containers in the same pod.
That should cover the init contianer use case and more.

Reviewer: does that mean we can have priviliged init containers for pods that are priviliged?

Author: I don't see why not?

Reviewer 2: Yea there shouldn't be a problem with that if the whole pod is privileged (which is the only thing possible at the moment)

#### Networking
- The container will be in the host’s network namespace (default network compartment) so it will have access to all the host’s network interfaces and have the host's IP as well.

#### Resource Limits
- Resource limits (disk, memory, cpu count) will be applied to the job and will be job wide. For example, with a limit of 10 MB is set for the job, if every process in the jobs memory allocations added up exceeds 10 MB this limit would be reached. This is the same behavior as other Windows container types. These limits would be specified the same way they are currently for whatever orchestrator/runtime is being used.

#### Container Lifecycle 
- The container's lifecycle will be managed by the container runtime just like other Windows container types.

#### Container users 
-  The privileged container should be able to run as any user that's available on the host or in the domain of the host machine. Password accounts are being investigated.

#### Container Mounts

> - Directory mounts (i.e. directory C:\test mapped to C:\test in the privileged container) are still being investigated. Note that file system mapping in the current implementation would expose both the host filesystem and the container filesystem to the processes in the privileged container. We are still investigation how external mounts such as secrets or storage accounts would be added. The default visibility of all the host filesystem may present backwards compatibility challenges in the future if host path mounting is enabled in Windows. Currently the only method to restrict would be via the user in a way similar to [UID or GID](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/) in the PSP. Currently however, this host path mounting is unlikely to be enabled in the future as a restriction of Job Objects.

Reviewer: Can we add information on how we would use users and file permissions on the folders to restrict access to the host?

#### Container Images

> - Privileged containers can be built on top of existing Windows base iamges (nanoserver, servcore, etc).

Reviewer 2: servercore*

Reviewer 2: images* also :P

- A slim base image may be introduced to act as a replacement for [scratch]. On windows graphdriver calls expect some files (mainly registry hives) and these would be included in the slim base image.

> - Privileged containers will not inherit the same same [compatability requriments](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/windowscontainers/deploy-containers/version-compatibility) as process isolated containers from an OS perspecitve.

Reviewer 2: Two sames

requirements*

> - Privileged containers will not inherit the same same [compatability requriments](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/windowscontainers/deploy-containers/version-compatibility) as process isolated containers from an OS perspecitve.

Reviewer: Can we expand on what this means?  Does it mean if I create a privileged container I can use the same image on 1809/1909/2004/20H2?

Author: @dcantah can you help out here?
Based on my understanding there won't be any OS/kernel compatability issues but containerd might have issues pulling/starting the contianer.

Author: I tried to capture this with some updates. let me know if what i added makes sense.

Reviewer 2: There is no compatibility concerns here. ContainerD can pull any Windows image regardless of what host you're on, I think this is solely a problem with Docker where it screams at you when pulling. These containers also allow you to launch any container image regardless of build, as we don't actually get the depths of HCS where that error would come into play.

#### Container Image Build/Definition

> - This is another ongoing area of investigation and open to feedback. Currently only a subset of dockerfile operations are supported (ADD, COPY, PATH, ENTRYPOINT, etc).

Reviewer: Which ones do not work?

Reviewer 2: For the trimmed down image, anything that requires an operation to occur inside a running container (so RUN is axed for starters).

Author: Need feedback from @dcantah here. I think RUN commands generally will not work because they can modify system state (registry, services, etc) and those changes won't be persist in the privileged container case.

Example: I'm thinking of a case where a user makes a docker file that installs a windows service and expects that to run when the contianer starts. What would happen in the privileged contianer case?

Author: @dcantah @jsturtevant, should we list which  operations **won't** work our list operations that **will** work here?

Reviewer 2: The trimmed down image isn't even going to be available for the Alpha is it? We haven't talked to MCR to see about hosting it yet, so is it worth going into detail on build instructions for it?

Reviewer 2: I think which ones WILL work seems more appropriate though

Author: I want to call our that not all commands won't work. I'll just say we're continuing to investigate

Author: Actually, i think me saying this is an ongoing area of investigation is sufficient for now.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good!

- [LinuxContainerSecurityContext](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/master/pkg/apis/runtime/v1alpha2/api.proto#L612)

For Windows we are proposing the following updates to CRI-API:

Add WindowsPodSandboxConfig (and it to PodSandboxConfig)

```protobuf
message WindowsPodSandboxConfig {
  WindowsSandboxSecurityContext security_context = 1;
}
```

Add WindowsSandboxSecurityContext:

```protobuf
message WindowsSandboxSecurityContext {
  string run_as_username = 1;
  bool privileged = 2;
}
```

Update WindowsContainerSecurityContext by adding privilged field:

```protobuf
message WindowsContainerSecurityContext {
  string run_as_username = 1;
  string credential_spec = 2;
  bool privileged = 3;
}
```

*Note:* For alpha annotaions on RunPodSandbox and CreateContainer CRI calls may be used untill a version of containerd with Windows privileged container support is released.

### Kubernetes API updates

#### Privilged Flag

A new boolean field named `privileged` will be added to [WindowsSecurityContextOptions](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.20/#windowssecuritycontextoptions-v1-core).

> On Windows, privileged containers must run in a privileged pod. Because of this behavior and because `WindowsSecurityContextOptions` already exists on both `PodSecurityContext` and `Container.SecurityContext` Windows containers will use this new field instead of re-using the existing `privileged` field which only exists on `SecurityContext`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Windows, all containers in a pod must be priviliged. Because of this behavior and because `WindowsSecurityContextOptions` already exists on both `PodSecurityContext` and `Container.SecurityContext` Windows containers will use this new field instead of re-using the existing `privileged` field which only exists on `SecurityContext`.
```

Having a new field will also help us better anticipate / validate user intention.

> API validation will ensure that if `privileged` is set in `Container.SecurityContext.WindowsSercurityContextOptions` then `privileged` is also set in `PodSecurityContext.WindowsSecurityContextOptions`. Current behavior applies pod `WindowsSecurityContextOptions` to all container level `WindowsSecurityContextOptions` if not specified.

Reviewer: How will this be handled when docker is configured?  Does it just get ignored?

Author: I sort of addressed this with https://github.com/marosset/enhancements/pull/1/files#diff-493c2d33daaf29edd9305ef315b84862aab8377c2b09142a14519fb977c9624eR569

Author: we have no way of knowing the contianer runtime at the time we do api validation (as far as i know) so we'll have to rely on checks in the kubelet.

No additional validation will be performed against the existing `privilege` on `SecurityContext`.

#### Host Network Mode

Host Network mode for privleged Windows containers will always be enabled, as the pod will automatically get the host IP.

Privileged Windows containers will be unable to align to pod namespaces due to limitiations in the Windows OS. This functionaility may likely be enabled in the future through a new KEP.

> Because of this we do not plan on performing **any** valiation around the existing `hostNetowrk` PodSpec field. This will give us the flexability to align privileged containers to host or pod namespaces in the future if/when that functionaility is added. Instead we will rely on documentation to explain 

Reviewer: Should we warn in logs that it is set but ignored?

Author: My opinion is documentation should be good enough.  we can update the KEP for beta / GA with more checks/logs if needed.

-->

Alpha

- Unit tests around valiation logic for new API fields.

> - Testgrid job validating basic privileged container functionalily (pod starts and run in a privileged context on the  node)

Reviewer: new job or just new tests?

Author: New test(s) - will clarify

      - Impact of its outage on the feature:
      - Impact of its degraded performance or high-error rates on the feature:

> ### Scalability

Reviewer: should consider constraints on networking for pods that use host network?

Author: I don't follow.

Reviewer: there was some conversation when we went to sig-networking around scalability issues if the containers get attached to the host network.  Will this cause networking limitations if too many pods are scheduled with host networking enabled?

Author: Ah - I have absolutely no idea.
@dcantah, @JocelynBerrendonner any ideas?
Scalability requirements / concerns can be part of a push to beta

Reviewer 2: There's essentially *no* network setup here, the question could be framed as "Is there a networking scalability concern with too many processes on Windows?" Jocelyn can chime in here though also
